I came to Iran in April of last year. By now, my husband and I thought we’d be back home in the United States. But with Covid-19 ravaging the country and the rest of the world, our tickets have been canceled. At first, I felt very insecure about being here, even as it is becoming clear that nowhere is safe from the spread of the coronavirus. We’re in a large city that is purely dependent on agriculture from other areas — questions of supply chain shortages and failures concerned me, as well as the potential for civil unrest. After all, it has been an extremely hard 2019 and 2020 for Iranians, pandemic aside.
However, after reading Western news and media and seeing the panic buying of toilet paper, disinfectants, and masks, I’ve wondered if perhaps it is not actually better to be here in Iran.
It has been an extremely hard 2019 and 2020 for Iranians, pandemic aside.
These days, supermarkets, farmers markets, and other shops in Tehran are at times crowded, full of people waiting in line with larger than usual amounts of food to buy. But so far, I haven’t seen any shoving, grabbing, fighting, or hoarding. The shelves are stocked. There haven’t been any shortages that I have yet noticed. I can still find everything I need.
Toilet paper is not as big a need here as elsewhere — people wash their bodies with water after using the restroom and might use toilet paper just to dry off. Nobody is doing the customary three kisses on the cheeks anymore; some have adopted the Wuhan Shake, or foot bump.
Very likely, the upcoming Nowruz, or Persian New Year, is going to be quite different, as it is customary to visit all your living relatives and host them as well. The road to the north has been blocked, banning Tehrani travelers from potentially spreading the virus to other, more susceptible and less prepared communities, like what has happened in Rasht, where there are no beds at the local hospital and plenty of patients still needing care.
There is an underlying belief in Iran that if you want to be safe from the coronavirus, you must also protect those near you. How can you be safe if your neighbors get infected?
There has been some ugly behavior here. Within the first week, masks had largely disappeared in Tehran and were being sold for much higher prices by opportunistic hawkers. Lemons, ginger, and garlic were very hard to find at the regular farmers markets — other vendors bought up the supply and have been selling them at two to three times the regular price, knowing they would be in high demand. Prices for ethyl alcohol are still extremely expensive.
The coronavirus in Iran has been marked by an enormous infection rate, a high death rate, the inadequacy of the Iranian medical system to deal with this pandemic, the effect of sanctions on medical supplies, governmental mismanagement, and a lot of other complications.
But there have also been a lot of beautiful things — far less reported on — happening below the surface. I wrote this piece to share a few:
The anonymous ATM machine disinfecters: People have been photographed voluntarily disinfecting ATMs and providing homemade tools to limit spread of the virus.
People leaving unused plastic gloves on public garbage bins for rummagers and garbage and recycling collectors.
The voluntary translation of coronavirus instructions by a Chinese alumna of the University of Tehran, and another group of Chinese people and Iranian language students studying Chinese who are working hard to translate more information about the virus and its prevention from Chinese into Farsi.
The people of Kakhk, Razavi Khorasan, a tiny agricultural town near the Afghanistan border, who have delivered gloves, homemade masks, and ethyl alcohol to each home.
Landlords waiving two months of shop rent for their tenants.
Microbiology specialists volunteering to work on coronavirus tests.
A group of people gathering volunteers to make masks and full-body protective gear for health care workers.
A campaign to help the people who have been destroyed by the economic crash.
Regular people donating to support flood victims in Iran, despite the pressing nature of the coronavirus affecting everyone.
The government giving everyone with existing home internet accounts 100 GB of free ADSL internet for two weeks so people can stay at home and work and not be tempted to go out.
The dancing medical staff and singers in the hospitals trying to keep everyone’s morale high.
The Iranian Children National Library has made 23,000 children’s books available to read for free online for library members, as the National Library is currently closed.
The government’s extension of license validity for things like the operation of wells.
Free sweets from a Gorgan bakery for doctors and nurses at nearby hospitals as a way of saying, “Thank you, warriors.”
Online messages encouraging people to continue feeding the urban animals that roam the parks.
And so many people taking care of their neighbors and co-workers, hunting through their network for someone who may have disinfectant or medicine to share.
There is an underlying belief in Iran that if you want to be safe from the coronavirus, you must also protect those near you. How can you be safe if your neighbors get infected?
Ultimately, we are all in this together. I hope we can all learn from the Iranians, who are suffering immensely and have little or inadequate medical resources to work with — yet they still share what they have and take care of those around them.
The coronavirus doesn’t distinguish between rich or poor, race or creed, or geography. We all rely on each other in this modern system we have built. By taking care of one another, we may be able to better weather this storm. And as I see it, working together is our best bet for survival and resilience.
Your Coronavirus Work-From-Home Wellness Plan
Expert advice on staying active, where to sit, and what to snack on when your home becomes your office
nlight of COVID-19, thousands of people are starting to work from home, and on behalf of freelancers, writers, and programmers everywhere, I would like to say, “Welcome to the couch.”
As a health and science writer, I have been working from home pretty much full time for almost three years. Full disclosure: There are a lot of bad habits you can fall into. And, yes, distractions, endless snacks, and having no technical reason to leave your bed or put on pants can leave you feeling blah mentally and physically. But I’ve also learned that with the right routine, your home can be conducive to a healthier work environment than the office.
Here’s a run-down on ways you can set yourself up for work-from-home wellness success.
Stay active using the “Pomodoro Technique”
While being cooped up in the house all day may hurt your step count, especially if you walk or bike as part of your commute, it doesn’t have to. The best thing about working from home is you’ve gained back all the time you normally spend heading to and from work. Put that hour (or more) to good use and get outside for a walk or run, ideally first thing in the morning to get some of that good morning light, which is linked to greater alertness, better sleep, and less stress.
In our new COVID-19 reality, the great outdoors where you don’t have to touch anything or come into contact with anyone is one of the safest places you can be. That includes parks, running trails, the backyard, even sidewalks — as long as you maintain your social-distancing six-foot radius — so don’t be afraid to get outside for some fresh air.
You can also get away with doing way more weird workouts throughout the day than you could at the office. Add them up, and you can fit a whole workout in without the gym (most of which are closed anyway at this point).
A lot of people swear by the productivity hack of the Pomodoro Technique where you set a timer for 25 minutes of focus, after which you get a five-minute break. During each break, try doing a different bodyweight exercise: push-ups, crunches, squats, tricep dips, jumping jacks, burpees (although maybe hold off if you have downstairs neighbors), walking lunges, planks, sun salutations — anything that gets your body moving is good.
If you realize that it’s past noon and you haven’t done any of these things yet, don’t despair, you can always head out for a lunchtime walk or run. Or you can multi-task and go out for a walk while you’re on a call. Whatever you do, make sure you get outside at least once a day.
“Laptops are much lower, and people tend to bend forward at the waist and curl over and look down at the screen, and they cause lots of back and neck issues.”
Create a routine and keep up social connections for mental health
Exercise is not only critical for your physical health, it’s one of the best things you can do for your mental health, and it can help your productivity and focus.
Just as important for maintaining sanity is speaking with another human being. Tools like Slack are great for keeping open channels of communication, but don’t forget about picking up the phone and calling or video chatting someone from time to time. If you have a friend you always get coffee or lunch with, try to keep up the tradition over the phone, or use this as an opportunity to start a new one. (Remember, your co-workers will be just as stir-crazy and starved for conversation as you are.)
“Social isolation is a real thing — especially for people who really thrive on those connections with other people, but all of us benefit from social bonds,” says Cathleen Swody, an industrial and organizational psychologist.
Swody recommends setting up time with your team for daily or weekly check-ins that aren’t necessarily about work. “Have room for the watercooler aspect of the office. The chit-chat, the conversation down the hall, those little things that connect us to other people, even if it’s not 100% work related,” she says. “It doesn’t take a lot of time, so for those who really want to get stuff done it’s not a time suck, but there’s some humanity in it.”
Also be sure to set boundaries on your time, especially at the end of the day. Try to keep your normal morning and evening routines so you don’t experience work creep. “The key words are routine and ritual,” says Swody. “You don’t want to get lost in the ambiguity of the situation, so having some time markers are important.”
Create an ergonomic workspace
One of the best ways to maintain that work/home boundary is to set up a dedicated office area. Even when people don’t have a room in their home to allocate as an office, they can still try to carve out a corner of the living room or kitchen table. When you’re in that area you’re at work, and when you’re not you’re at home.
This will also help you maintain an ergonomic setup that’s better for your neck than slouching on the couch. “You might feel comfortable doing that [slouching on the couch] for a period of time, and you’re like, ‘Well I’m not having pain, so I can work in bed or sit on the couch,’” says Susan Macdonald, owner of Bay Area Ergonomics. “But in reality, you’re doing damage, you’re causing a lot of muscular strain, and what that does is over time, when you start having pain, you’ve already done a lot of damage.”
Jonathan Cinkay, a physical therapist and body mechanics coordinator at the Hospital for Special Surgery in New York, says that the best ergonomic foundation is a desk and chair setup where your elbows can be bent to 90 degrees, meaning you’re not sitting too low or too high compared to the desk. Where your hands naturally land is where your keyboard and mouse should be. If your chair isn’t adjustable, you can always improvise with a pillow, and get a footstool if your feet don’t touch the floor to take pressure off your legs and lower back. Finally, the top of your monitor should be eye level so you don’t strain your neck. If you can’t raise it, set it on top of a few books or a ream of printer paper.
If you use a laptop, the same principles apply, the most important being to raise the screen up to eye level. This may mean you need to invest in a separate mouse and keyboard so you can keep those on the desk while your computer is propped up.
“Laptops are much lower, and people tend to bend forward at the waist and curl over and look down at the screen, and they cause lots of back and neck issues,” Cinkay says. It’s fine to use your laptop on the couch a little bit, but ideally for not more than an hour or two. And when you are working on your couch, you want to use your eyes to look down, don’t tilt your neck and head.
The golden rule, according to Cinkay, is to get up every hour and move — go to the bathroom, walk around the room, stretch, get a drink of water or a snack.
“Have room for the watercooler aspect of the office. The chit-chat, the conversation down the hall, those little things that connect us to other people, even if it’s not 100% work related.”
Snack as if nobody’s watching
When you’re working from home, there are no co-workers to shame you if you go back for second (and third and fourth) helpings of Thin Mints. And while this isn’t necessarily a bad thing — it’s okay to treat yourself while there’s a global pandemic happening — it’s something to be aware of when you’re stocking your pantry with quarantine snack options.
As someone with a massive sweet tooth and fairly low self-control, I realized the only way I can avoid eating an entire box of cookies in a day is not to have one in the house in the first place. Instead, I try to opt for single-serving protein-heavy snacks that fill me up the first time so I’m not craving more.
For example, I’m a big fan of hard-boiled eggs, avocado toast, turkey and cheese slices, or a banana and peanut butter. 
Also, be aware of Foods in Bags that you can mindlessly munch on until you realize the bag is gone. You’re a lot less likely to reach for a second apple than a second handful of Cheez-Its.
Real-talk disclaimer
Much of this article is a case of “do as I say, not as I do.” Working from home can be really hard. Some days you feel like you’ve gotten nothing done, other days you’re so busy you realize it’s 4 in the afternoon and you haven’t left the house. The most important thing is to find out what works for you and do the best you can to maintain some semblance of healthy habits, balance, and normalcy. Be gentle with yourself; if you didn’t stick to the exact routine you wanted today, there’s always tomorrow. But whether you’re feeling distracted and unmotivated or stressed out and overwhelmed, I guarantee you will feel better if you get outside and go for a walk.
The coronavirus outbreak is rapidly evolving. To stay informed, check the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention as well as your local health department for updates. If you’re feeling emotionally overwhelmed, reach out to the Crisis Text Line.
Trump Is Now Calling COVID-19 “The Chinese Virus”. But If The Global Economy Melts Down, That’ll Very Much Be A U.S.-led Phenomenon
How can banks possibly figure out who to lend money to?
In order to know that they’d have to have some idea of how much deeper the disruption of daily life in America is going to go.
And to know that they’d need to know how many people the virus is going to impact physically. And how many are already infected.
And how long will businesses have to be shuttered, at least temporarily? And how many people will lose their jobs? And how many people (and small businesses) will stop being able to pay their bills? And for how long: a little bit of time, or forever?
Time frames keep getting longer. Answers keep changing. The White House now seems to be going with a projection by infectious disease modelers and analysts in Britain. Their report shows Coronavirus deaths in the U.S. peaking in mid-June after rising sharply in May, and not really falling off until the end of the summer. And that’s the worst case scenario. With mitigation and/or suppression, cases might not peak as dramatically, and would likely spread out over many more months. Until development of a vaccine, the virus would likely spike from time to time, leading the medical analysts to suggest rules might at times be relaxed, but then reinstated as infections rebound. Leading us to envision something like the color-coded terrorism threat levels we saw after 9–11.
The same report shows impact lessened significantly by rigorous adherence to school closings, work from home, and strict quarantine if infected. And additional “social distancing” for those over 70 years of age. Interestingly (unless we’re reading this wrong), while the White House recommends gatherings of no more than 10 people, the British analysts posit: “Stopping mass gatherings is predicted to have relatively little impact.” So much so that they don’t even include it as a variable in their findings. They say that’s because the time people spend at those type of events is relatively small to the amount of time they spend at home, school, work, or in bars and restaurants.
Trump seems to be referring to that report in his latest briefing:
“It seems to me that if we do a really good job, we’ll not only hold the death down to a level that is much lower than the other way had we not done a good job. But people are talking about July, August, something like that. So it could be right in that period of time. Where I say ‘it washes through’. Other people don’t like that term. But where it washes through….We’ll see what happens, but they think August, could be July, could be longer than that…”
So despite the President’s customary vagueness, there may be more about the virus that’s becoming a little more predictable (of course we won’t actually know for sure if the projections are right before they do or don’t happen), and that’ll be absolutely necessary for the economy to get back on to any kind of path to recovery as well. Apple for instance has reopened stores in China because there are good counts now of Coronavirus cases there, with seemingly credible evidence the rate of infection is going down. (At least credible enough to convince Apple.) But the U.S. still really has no idea how many cases it’s got.
Yes, banks assess risk all the time as part of their normal course of business, but this is so far beyond that. And when they can’t use the tools they’re familiar with to determine what’s likely to happen in the future, banks freeze. And the economy locks up.
Which is why — as we’ve discussed in our last few columns — the Federal Reserve has been working so hard to stop that from happening, and should not be lambasted — at least not right this sec — for “taking care of bankers and no one else”. Because the Fed is pretty much alone so far in trying to take care of a broad swath of American society, at least in terms of preventing economic collapse.
For banks to lend money to people (or small businesses), they have to have a reasonable assumption those people are going to pay them back. But right now they have no way of knowing that. Zero. Even if it’s someone who’s been a good customer before. And a lot of people are going to need money at least to tide them over for a few months, maybe even more.
So part of what the Fed’s recently been trying to do is make it very easy for those banks to push those loans out a couple of months at least, even if they don’t get paid back right away, without hurting them too much.
In some ways it’s similar to what public health officials are trying to do with the virus: help “flatten the curve” so some people will hopefully be getting back on their feet again by the time others get sick, or in this case in dire financial straits. And while some will fail, if those failures are more spread out, the economy shouldn’t all come crashing down at once.
What we’re also seeing is it’s extraordinarily hard to convince banks to do this. They’re more inclined to do “social distancing” of their own: that is, distance themselves from making loans that may potentially turn out bad.
Which means the Fed can’t ultimately succeed without the timely help of Congress and the White House. Yet here is where you may start to see some naked inequity in who gets helped and who doesn’t. Airlines will get bailouts. Are they too big to fail? Probably not, but transportation is essential to the global economy. (Trump has said he hopes this virus will compel people to travel less overseas in the future and spend more vacation time — and dollars — in the U.S.) Cruise lines will also get help, probably. Should they really? And you can bet casinos will get lots of federal dollars: Trump’s good friends with several casino owners, some of whom are his biggest supporters. And Democrats too have a powerful figure protecting that industry in the form of former Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid, who’s from Nevada.

Will some of this just be flushing away money on people and businesses who don’t really deserve it? Yes. But in some ways it may be best to just cut those dollars loose, because as long as some of the money is well-spent, big cash influxes can only do more good than harm to the economy at this exact moment in time. At the same time, why not at least also boost industries that could really do some good right now, even if they’re not as deeply troubled, but might need to shift their business models a bit to really be helpful: like shippers and freight forwarders still suffering from a shortage of goods from China, which might be able to adapt some of their know-how and equipment to ensure supply lines in this country stay open, even in the face of looming curfews and possible lock-downs? (And shortages of medication and medical equipment, a lot of which comes from China).
We also think Utah Republican Sen. Mitt Romney’s idea of quickly giving every American $1,000 is great. Not because anyone can live on $1,000 for a long time, but because put in the hands of individual American consumers, it would likely be spent and not wasted. Unlike the piles of cash big corporations and financial institutions may be sitting on, but are too afraid to do anything with other than sit on it. Or may get from the government and may spend unwisely in a way that does not most directly benefit employees. The pushback on Romney’s idea is mostly along the lines that a lot of people don’t need $1,000, and a lot of people need a lot more than $1,000.
But you know what? Instead of sitting around talking about it, get that money out there and give people the opportunity to use it to take care of each other and do right by each other. We’re already seeing some truly remarkable individual efforts in a lot of situations: like this doctor in Michigan who’s figured out a way — maybe — to provide ventilation for 4 patients off a single ventilator. She admits it hasn’t been tested, but says it’s been done in Las Vegas following the mass shooting there several years ago. This kind of ingenuity is just remarkable, and cannot be legislated.
Trump’s preferred response of a reduction in payroll taxes (which he wanted to do anyway, long before the Coronavirus was on the horizon), is not such a great solution: because it doesn’t help people who lose their jobs and thus are not on a payroll. And it doesn’t help many service employees who are paid mostly in tips.
And one thing we need to always remember in all of this, the U.S. is already running a record budget deficit. So all this emergency money will just be added to that, and make it a lot worse. But it has to be done. What didn’t have to be done is the $1.5-trillion tax cut Trump and Republicans giddily pushed through when the economy was booming. Regardless of what happens in the coming weeks and months, we — and our children, grandchildren, etc. — will be paying for that for years and decades. Had the U.S. come into this situation with a budget surplus, which it could’ve, given how robust the economy was at the time the tax cut was passed, a lot of what has to happen now could’ve been done with fewer inevitable dire economic consequences down the road.
Yeah, that’s water under the bridge now. But also — to paraphrase the eloquent words of one of our readers who sent us a note today — it all adds up to: “money blowing over a waterfall to depths we cannot fathom”.
I have MS. My disease-modifying therapy is Rituxan, a chemo drug used off-label for MS. The idea is that, with an autoimmune disease like MS, if you can wipe out the offending B cells, it might slow down the progression of the disease — put it into remission. At least for awhile.
When I was diagnosed and chose this DMT over two others (they all suck, though I’m grateful for them), I knew I’d be immunosuppressed and just resigned myself to being sick all the time. Though I did get sick now and then, it was far less than I’d anticipated. I tried to use diet, vitamins, and supplements to boost my immunity in positive ways, for whatever it was worth. I longed to have some sense of control over some part of it, because MS is a real mindfuck.
And somewhere along the way I realized: We’re all dealing with a similar mindfuck in that we don’t know what’s coming next, but we know, eventually, something terrible will come. MS just amplifies our frailty as an epically constructed meat machine with a million lines of code that can contain fatal flaws. We’re all walking through this jungle, but I’m being slowly swallowed by the snake instead of waiting for it to strike.
As this pandemic has swept over the globe with a horrible pulse of its own, I’ve kept my shit together. I’ve made light, downplayed, and embraced gallows humor — in between vigorous handwashings. But I’ve made plenty of mistakes, like touching the edge of my water bottle and drinking from it after touching bedknobs and broomsticks and all manner of things. I’ve wiped my nose with the back of my hand after probably brushing it against someone’s coat. I shook my physical therapist’s hand, and then we looked at each other and apologized. I didn’t get sick, I used insane amounts of hand sanitizer, and I stayed calm.
Now, as dominos of closings, emails detailing safety precautions (from my bank?), and innumerable headlines break over me, I feel myself drowning in unreality — and fear. I’m afraid of all of the unknowns and the ability of our government to handle this well. I’m afraid for people who don’t have the privileges I have who will be at more of a disadvantage than before. And I have to admit that I am afraid for myself.
I’m 45, in reasonably good health — aside from MS — and I have insurance, so I can seek medical attention without fear of catastrophic bills. I don’t think I’m going to die. And yet, there’s a curious brand of loneliness in being a member of one of the “at-risk” groups: the elderly, those with underlying conditions, and those who are immunosuppressed. While others can move through their now disrupted days fairly certain they’d be okay even if they contracted COVID-19, I’m less certain.
I’ve learned to distrust my body. It gets dizzy and nauseated and exhausted and sleepless and numb and blanketed with pain. It’s been an unreliable narrator for a long time. So when someone says “and the immunosuppressed,” I feel a heavy stone sink into my awareness and settle in my sternum. Isolating dread. I am one of those people. I am at-risk.
While I’ve combed articles specifically about my kind, I’ve discovered that there are even theories that having one’s B cells suppressed could be a good thing if infected, as a robust immune response might make symptoms worse. But no one knows for sure. We don’t have enough tests. We don’t have accurate numbers of those infected. We don’t have leaders at the top who make decisions based on care for the wellbeing of others. This all smacks of what a lot of parenting was like in the ’80s: half-assed, reckless, self-serving, and based on limited information. In other words, it feels like no grown-up is minding the store, and that’s scary.
There’s no conclusion to this because we’re all right in the middle of it. I do take some comfort from watching the people in Italy singing together from apartment balconies, the rush to set up free meals for kids who need them and can’t get them at school, and companies making services free during this strange time. All of those things are true. It’s also true that my next infusion is at the end of the month which will wipe out part of my immune system all over again. If I don’t get it, I risk having an MS attack which could have much bigger implications than getting the virus. Hats off to Joseph Heller.
So, here we all sit in uncertainty, some of us in a specially reserved section closer to the front. I have to remember that we are together, even though it feels lonely up here in the seats with a steeper price. I have to remember that I may not trust my body, but I see evidence of people doing kind, empathic acts for each other. I’ll keep washing my hands, watching those videos humans harmonizing, and remembering that as terrible as this is, it shows how deeply connected we truly are, below our skin, between our cells, with the very air we breathe.
Lie to me about the virus. I know the truth but, you know, the truth is overrated. I want fantasy and “what ifs.” Mind you, I’m not looking for an escape. I have Netflix for that. No, tell me a fable. I know they don’t live happily ever after but I want to be told they do. I want best-case scenarios instead of the sinking feeling that this is just the beginning.
I am overloaded with information. I know that the coronavirus, or COVID-19, isn’t the flu. For one thing, it’s more contagious than the flu. For another, the virus can escalate unexpectedly in ways healthcare professionals don’t understand yet. The mortality rate also appears to be higher than influenza, especially if you’re over 60 or have an underlying condition, like heart disease or cancer. But we need more data before that number is certain. We actually don’t know much.
The experts advise washing your hands. We learned that in kindergarten. I’m washing my hands so often the skin on my knuckles is cracking. The masks won’t protect you. They should be worn only if you’re infected. I saw a young man with an expensive mask panic-buy Pop-Tarts yesterday.
Doctors have other suggestions: don’t touch your face even though you only remember that after you’ve touched your face. Avoid crowded places, like public transportation or Starbucks at peak hours. Practice ‘social distancing,’ which is every teenager’s primary survival tactic. Work from home if you can. Make your own hand sanitizer.
This is all common knowledge by now. If you’re reading this you know to wash your hands. You’ve read the same stories and watched the same broadcasts. You also know something is coming. There’s a weird energy in the air. A charge. Calls home to check in end with intense “I love yous.”
The virus is spreading across the globe but unlike other countries where testing of patients has been swift and thorough, America can’t seem to get its shit together.
The economy is cratering. The Federal government is impotent. The President of the United States is a fool beyond his ability to cope. Cable news is a ghost ship. The shelves of grocery stores are empty. People are panic buying canned soup and toilet paper like they’ll be post-apocalyptic currencies. In a suburb of New York City, the military is setting up blockades to contain a community outbreak, which feels like a dress rehearsal.
The medical system will likely be overwhelmed soon with the sick and the terrified. There aren’t enough beds, you see. Caregivers are already exhausted. This is all happening very quickly, and all at once.
Pretty soon I’m going to have to play the grim game: “Allergies or COVID-19?”
There will be those who can afford more comfort than others. A lucky few will lock themselves inside modern-day castles protected by mercenaries with families of their own outside the walls. But it won’t matter. Historically speaking plagues have a way of visiting princes and peasants alike. Diseases don’t have passports, either. They don’t need them.
I’m afraid that things are going to get worse before they get better. If they get better. I have never liked people who say “this is the new normal.” They’re usually referring to racism or inequality, which are the most normal things ever. But what if this really is the new normal? What if this is it? What if it’s just pandemics and floods and wars from here on out?
I don’t trust the media. I don’t trust the authorities. I don’t know if there are enough heroic doctors and nurses to save us. This country knew this kind of disaster was inevitable but we chose to torment each other in ways big and small instead. Our politics is so base, just hunger and fear, teeth and bone. Oh, what cruel, greedy little fuckers we are.
The virus will be everywhere soon if it’s not already. Everything will close. Schools, churches, fast food restaurants. No parades. No music. No dancing. There will be riots but if there’s one type of crook cops love to execute on the spot its looters, even if they’re just stealing baby formula. Most of us will retreat into our homes, like everyday Pharaohs sealed in tombs filled with canned soups and toilet paper. Social media will be an endless scroll of people begging for help. It will come for some and not others.
I will make jokes in quarantine. I will write funny tweets and make funny videos. I will announce in a silly voice that I’m eating the last box of mac and cheese. In the hospital, my laughter will dissolve into wheezing. There is a high probability I will survive but something is going to kill me eventually: COVID-20, mass starvation, shitty health insurance.
I know things are bad. I know the worst is yet to come. I don’t need to hear the truth because I already know it. What I want is to be lied to. So… lie to me. Please. I want to be told this will all work out. That there will be a cure. A vaccine. That compassion and gentleness and love will prevail. I’d prefer the lies to not be jokes.
And don’t lie to me the way politician’s lie: I don’t need to be told who to hate or who hates me. No, I’m tired of those lies. I’m also done with all of the petty lies of capitalism. A brand new car won’t make me happy. I am not my paycheck. There are people who work hard, who work until they can’t work anymore, and still struggle.
No. I want to be told that honesty matters. That there are people who do the right thing because it is the right thing to do. I want to believe that justice will win in the end and I want to believe that even though I know it is not true.
Tell me the world can be healed. That innocent people can be saved. I want to be told the story of an angel blinding a billionaire because he refused to heed his command to feed the hungry and care for the sick. I want the following whispered into my ear: evil is defeated.
What if we can fix what we’ve broken? What if every prayer is answered?
I want gorgeous lies about humans loving humans. I want colossal lies about mankind’s capacity to grow. I want tender lies that promise we will all be forgiven. Tell me the moon smiles upon us all when we sleep. Tell me our children’s tomorrows will be filled with joy and wonder. Tell me those gasping for air will breathe again. I want to have faith in humans, holding hands. If this is just the beginning I want to believe what happens next will be good.
colorful 3D rendering of a spiky fuzzball has spread around the world at least as fast as the coronavirus. The image, used by news media around the world, was created by Alissa Eckert, a medical illustrator at the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC).
It is not a photograph, but rather an illustrated visualization of the microscopic coronavirus.
“The image was originally designed with the public in mind,” Eckert tells Elemental. “However, it also serves to help researchers differentiate and visualize their information. Creating visual representations of diseases provides a way to take something complex and abstract and make it tangible through visualization.”
Viruses like SARS-CoV-2, the coronavirus that causes COVID-19 disease, are not technically living things, and they can’t reproduce on their own. They invade cells in the bodies of animals, including humans, and take over — making people sick. The hijacked host cells then reproduce the virus. We may feel sick for two reasons: The virus can disrupt the normal function of our cells or destroy them; and our immune system springs into action, causing symptoms such as a fever, intended to kill the virus with heat.
The 3D rendering of the novel coronavirus uses vibrant colors that are not what would appear if you could see the virus with your own eyes, but here’s what the image reveals:

Image: CDC/Alissa Eckert
The gray surface is a spherical envelope that surrounds the nucleus of the virus, containing genetic material.
Orange bits are a “membrane proteins,” or M proteins, the most abundant structural protein in the virus and one that gives it form, says Eckert. These and other proteins vary from one type of virus to another, and can be used to help understand or identify one virus from another.
Yellow bits are envelope proteins (E proteins), the smallest of the structural proteins. They “play an important role either in regulating virus replication — such as virus entry — assembly and release,” according to other research.
Red spikes: These clumps of proteins (called S proteins) are “what the virus uses to gain entry into and attach to the cell,” says Eckert. They also create the effect of a halo, or corona, around the virus.
The red spikes latch onto human cells and cause the membrane of the virus to fuse with the membrane of the human cell. The genes from the coronavirus can then enter the host cell and be copied.
The red spikes of the new coronavirus are “10 to 20 times more likely to bind” to human cells than the spike from the 2002 SARS coronavirus, researchers have found. “This may enable SARS-CoV-2 to spread more easily from person to person than the earlier virus, they conclude.
“Working with the virus as a three-dimensional structure allows you the freedom to interact with the structure and manipulate and design it as needed to convey the message,” Eckert says. “One goal is that through this visualization we can help inform and educate the public about the disease, and thus hopefully help improve public health by limiting and halting the spread of disease.”
Scientists are using the 3D rendering and many other different images and troves of genetic data to study the virus.
An electron microscope image shows the new coronavirus, SARS-CoV-2, isolated from a U.S. person infected with COVID-19. Particles are emerging from the surface of cells cultured in the lab. The spikes on the outer edge of the virus are blue, not red, in this image. NIAID-RML
Earlier this year, scientists in China publicly released the genome sequence of the new coronavirus. Scientists at the National Institutes of Health and elsewhere are using that information, along with electron-microscope imagery and other data to develop a potential vaccine, which officials say is likely months away.
“We hope these findings will aid in the design of candidate vaccines and the development of treatments for COVID-19,” says Dr. Barney Graham, deputy director of the Vaccine Research Center at the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases.
The coronavirus outbreak is rapidly evolving. To stay informed, check the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention as well as your local health department for updates. If you’re feeling emotionally overwhelmed, reach out to the Crisis Text Line.
Looking at the map above, it’s tempting to think that coronavirus may be limited to temperate zones. Wuhan, Seoul, Qom, Milan, and Seattle were all between 5–11° C during their outbreaks. By this logic, the global south may be protected, and winter may bring everyone some relief. Sadly, this probably isn’t true.
Let’s look at another map.
This is the global aviation network. As you can see, the affected regions are, not just cooler, they’re also much more connected. This more than anything may explain where the virus has spread.
In a weird way, racism more than temperature has protected the global south.
Under border apartheid, people from rich and white colonial countries have the right to travel and the poor, brown and formerly colonized do not. As a Sri Lankan, I have visa-free access to 22% of the world compared to 95% as a Canadian. The Global South lives under a permanent travel ban, which has proved useful in the age of coronavirus. We simply have fewer airports, fewer flights, and less personal freedom.
Now the tables have turned, with Italians trying to escape to Ethiopia, and countries all over the world instituting travel bans on Europe. For the first time in my life, a brown passport is useful. However, this protection isn’t secure.
Coronavirus isn’t racist and borders can only delay, not stop, its spread. Unless there’s some natural protection that the virus gives a shit about, we’ll get infected all the same, just later.
So is there? Racism aside, is temperature any defense against this virus?
Can heat slow corona down?
We already know that high temperatures won’t kill coronavirus. There are significant outbreaks in Malaysia and Indonesia, which are currently hot as balls (25–35° C). The question then is whether high temperatures can even slow it down.
The answer to this is probably yes. But don’t get too excited yet. There likely is a temperature effect, but likely not enough to really slow this thing down.
According to a paper by researchers at Sun Yat-sen University in Guangzhou:
Studies found that during the outbreak of SARS in 2003, when the temperature was low, the risk of increasing daily incidence rate could be 18.18 times higher than that under higher temperature.
And yet it is a myth that SARS went away on its own as the weather changed.
SARS did not die of natural causes. It was killed by extremely intense public health interventions in mainland Chinese cities, Hong Kong, Vietnam, Thailand, Canada and elsewhere. These involved isolating cases, quarantining their contacts, a measure of “social distancing,” and other intensive efforts. (Marc Lipsitch, Harvard)
Hence while researchers at the University of Maryland and Sun Yat-sen University have found strong temperature effects on coronavirus, it’s likely not enough to stop it or even really slow it down. Because temperature is only one variable. When it comes to the novel coronavirus, the most important effect may be its novelty.
The novel coronavirus
Sebastian Vettel warming up his tires
When F1 cars are running practice laps, they swing wildly back and forth to warm their tires. This temperature difference gives more grip and can lead to tenths-of-a-second faster lap times. In competition, this makes a big difference. However, if no one else is racing, it doesn’t matter. It’s an F1 car vs. nothing.
Right now, it’s the coronavirus vs. nothing. Our antibodies aren’t even on the track. Temperature might matter, but it doesn’t matter that much. The most important factor right now is that COVID-19 is brand new.
New viruses have a temporary but important advantage — few or no individuals in the population are immune to them. Old viruses, which have been in the population for longer, operate on a thinner margin — most individuals are immune, and they have to make do with transmitting among the few who aren’t. In simple terms, viruses that have been around for a long time can make a living — spread through the population — only when the conditions are the most favorable, in this case in winter. (Marc Lipsitch, Harvard CCDD)
In this way, even pandemic flu is quite different from seasonal flu. The latter can only spread when conditions are favorable, but a brand new flu finds favorable conditions everywhere.
The consequence is that new viruses — like pandemic influenza — can spread outside the normal season for their longer-established cousins. For example in 2009, the pandemic started in April-May (well outside of flu season), quieted in the summer (perhaps because of the importance of children in transmission of flu), and then rebounded in September-October, before the start of normal flu season. Seasonality does not constrain pandemic viruses the way it does old ones. This pattern is common for flu pandemics. (Marc Lipsitch, Harvard CCDD)
This is why epidemiologist Marc Lipsitch (who is a must-follow btw) says that warmer weather will probably not make coronavirus go away. “The size of the change is expected to be modest, and not enough to stop transmission on its own.”
So what?
Therefore, the WHO still issues the same guidance to warm countries as cold ones. The temperature effect still isn’t proven and, either way, it’s not enough to kill this thing.
We have no reason to believe that this virus would behave differently in different temperatures, which is why we want aggressive action in all countries to make sure that we prevent onward transmission, and that it’s taken seriously in every country. (Dr. Maria van Kerkhove, WHO briefing, 5 March 2020)
It seems quite likely that coronavirus prefers cooler climates, but it’s quite happy to spread south as well. The global south may get this disease last, but we’ll still get it in the end.
In the end, the only temperature that matters is 37°, the temperature of the human body. Until we build protections in there (a vaccine), no one is truly safe, and intense public health measures will have to be used all over the world.
Temperature, Humidity and Latitude Analysis to Predict Potential Spread and Seasonality for COVID-19 (March 5, 2020). Available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3550308 or http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3550308
Temperature Significantly Change COVID-19 Transmission in 429 cities, Sun Yat-sen University.
Seasonality of SARS-CoV-2: Will COVID-19 go away on its own in warmer weather? Marc Lipsitch, DPhil. Professor of Epidemiology and Director, Center for Communicable Disease Dynamics, Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health
dding to the list of cities and countries locking down, the COVID-19 pandemic has now added to the list the San Francisco Bay Area with six counties ordering a ‘shelter-in-place’. The order requires residents to remain at home except for essential travel such as for buying groceries and visiting the hospital. Thankfully, residents can still continue to go outside to exercise provided social distancing is established by being at least 6 feet apart from others. As the COVID-19 pandemic has impacted both the global economy and healthcare systems, is the COVID-19 pandemic the blackswan of this new decade and what can we do to prevent future pandemics from happening?
Both Wall Street and Main Street are feeling anxious and fearful. After a bullish decade, the bear is out of hibernation with global financial markets falling precipitously. Now with many cities around the world on lockdown, the real economy will most likely be affected as
Large-scale quarantines, travel restrictions, and social-distancing measures drive a sharp fall in consumer and business spending until the end of Q2, producing a recession…Consumers stay home, businesses lose revenue and lay off workers, and unemployment levels rise sharply (McKinsey — COVID-19: Implications for business)
It is amazing how a microscopic organism is capable of causing such a devastating impact to the global economy and people’s everyday lives.

COVID-19 can be a mild to life-threatening respiratory illness caused by the SARS-CoV-2 virus (2019-nCoV), which is commonly believed to have originated from a seafood market in Wuhan, China. As of 16 March 2020, the World Health Organization has confirmed 167,511 diagnosed cases and 6,606 deaths worldwide. Roughly ~3.9% of diagnosed cases of COVID-19 have resulted in mortality yet the current mortality rate may be over representative of the actual mortality rate given the difficulty of evaluating both asymptomatic and mildly symptomatic cases without costly population-wide diagnostic testing. For example, “…mortality rate in South Korea, where more than 1,100 tests have been administered per million residents, comes out to just 0.6%…”
Provided the global society continues to be united in its efforts, COVID-19 may not be as deadly as previous pandemics. For example, the 2009–2010 swine flu pandemic killed ~200,000 persons and the Hong Kong flu of 1968–1970 killed ~1 million persons. These statistics aren’t meant to discount the humanitarian crisis we are facing but rather the importance of assessing individual risk factors to contracting a severe case of COVID-19 and how to slow or eliminate the spread to vulnerable populations such as the elderly, patients with weakened immune systems, and the homeless.

With the human population growing and traveling to all corners of the world, pandemics are likely to become a more common occurrence, yet in 2018, Bill Gates noted:
…there’s one area though where the world isn’t making much progress…and that’s pandemic preparedness.
This is evident from the varied responses to COVID-19 — China building hospitals within days, Italy overburdening their healthcare system, the US lagging in diagnostic testing, to Singapore, South Korea, and Taiwan quickly containing the outbreak within their borders. The ability to expediently react to the current COVID-19 pandemic and to future pandemics will be important in curbing the economic and healthcare costs to global society.

While society may praise the efforts of the biopharmaceutical industry and government agencies in finding treatments and/or prophylaxis to COVID-19 and other emerging infectious diseases, there needs to be an understanding that such technologies may only be a partial solution to the ever-growing public health threat.
Just in the past two decades humanity has battled numerous emerging infectious diseases such as SARS, swine flu, MERS, ebola, and Zika yet we still don’t have any drugs or vaccines that adequately prevent or treat these diseases. HIV/AIDS continues to be a global health threat with health education being at the forefront of prevention and patients living with HIV having to take a lifetime cocktail of drugs to suppress HIV. Even vaccination for the seasonal flu has varied effectiveness each season as vaccine manufacturers need to guess which influenza strains may come up in the next season to develop the flu vaccine. If flu vaccine manufacturers guess right, individuals who are vaccinated will be protected from the flu, however, if they guess wrong, there is no benefit to have been vaccinated from the flu. Hence why each year there are still thousands of patients who die from seasonal flu due in combination to individual risk factors and variable vaccine effectiveness each year.

CDC influenza vaccine effectiveness studies (Source)
Overuse and misuse of antibiotics, particularly in animal agriculture, has also led to antibiotic resistant bacteria, which adds to the list of global health threats. Both viral and bacterial outbreaks will continue to occur even with advanced therapies as these microorganisms are capable of responding to them — viruses can vary their genetic make-up through antigenic drifts or shifts and bacteria can mutate or adapt their genetic make-up — resulting in microorganisms that are non-responsive to existing therapies.
There will be a continual need for scientists and drug manufacturers to discover and develop new therapies, however, society needs to understand that the majority (~90%) of investigational therapies that enter clinical trials won’t be effective and/or safe enough to enter the market and be the panacea to pandemics.

Phase success and likelihood of approvals (LOA) rates of academic drug discovery and development that was begun between 1991 and 2010. NDA/BLA, new drug application/biologics license application. (Clin Transl Sci. 2018 Nov; 11(6): 597–606)
Despite the need for pandemic preparedness and innovative medical therapies, building an infrastructure to support future pandemics is akin to mopping the floor when the faucet is leaking — it tends to the symptoms rather than the cause. As mentioned previously, animal agriculture is a major contributor to antibiotic resistance due to misuse of antibiotics in concentrated animal feeding operations (CAFOs), which are also the perfect breeding ground for the development of zoonotic diseases — bacterial, viral, and parasitic diseases that spread from non-human to human species. The SARS-CoV-2, SARS-CoV, Nipah virus, MERS, avian flu, and swine flu outbreaks are recent examples of zoonotic diseases that can be attributed to how humanity has been treating animals for food, consumer goods, and entertainment. As Gene Bauer has stated:
Our disrespectful treatment of other animals and the earth has consequences, and when they are harmed, ultimately, so are we.

What we do to animals will bite us back (Source)
Over the past decade, there has been a rise in the number of companies attempting to solve the environmental, animal (and human) rights, and human health issues of animal agriculture. The most notable are Beyond Meat, a plant-based meat company, which had the most successful IPO in 2019 and Impossible Foods, which recently raised $500 million in a Series F funding round. Other food-centric companies, specifically based in California, include Memphis Meats, JUST, Ripple, and Kite Hill. There are many more startups around the world developing new products through plant-based innovations to cellular agricultural approaches — the production of animal-based material without the animal. As Liz Specht has stated:
It’s time to admit that we, as a civilization, have outgrown the dated notion of using animals to produce meat. Hunting and animal farming served their purpose for millennia of human population growth. But in 2020, we need to be brutally honest with ourselves. We can’t keep doing this. The current system is broken. It is inefficient, insecure, unsustainable, and extremely unsafe.

Cellular agriculture will allow us to make meat without the “middle moo” (Source)
Understanding that the current state of medical solutions to pandemics is lagging and alternative animal agricultural products will take time to scale and be fully adopted by global society, are there any steps an individual can take now to mitigate the risk of future pandemics?
Each and every individual has the choice each day to vote with their money whether they value their own health, the health of others (animals and/or humans), and/or the health of our planet. The longest living and healthiest populations in the world eat mostly plants — fruits, vegetables, grains, nuts, beans, seeds, and legumes — and little to no animal-derived foods. What you eat during every meal or snack determines our future. Buy a lot of eggs, dairy, and meat; more CAFOs will remain overcrowded with sick and diseased animals contributing to zoonotic disease development and potential pandemics. Increase the demand for meat will increase the harm we do to our fellow human beings who process these sick and diseased animals for our consumption. Eat mostly animal-derived foods in every meal and snack greatly weakens the human body’s immune system, which will increase the risk of succumbing to chronic diseases and severe illnesses from future pandemics. By shifting to eating mostly plants, an individual not only prevents getting chronic diseases like heart disease, diabetes, obesity, and cancer, but also contributes to preventing the next infectious disease pandemic from occurring.
No, You Don’t Need Masks
As the developed world struggles to contain and respond to the novel coronavirus — some more effectively than others — there’s a marked change in many cities. Here in Washington, D.C., the streets are virtually empty. The metro at rush hour looks like the last train service on a three-day weekend. No one is concerned about manspreading because no one is willing to sit next to anyone else.

A marked difference between the scene in American cities and Asian countries is the relative lack of masks. Ever since the 1918 Spanish flu, surgical masks became an entrenched part of Asian culture, increasing in frequency during the 2002 SARS scare and the 2009 swine flu pandemic. In South Korea, Singapore, and Japan, local governments handed out masks.

My neighbor is fully recovered but still does not have his COVID-19 test results.
Although a handful have begun to wear masks in the United States, most have not. The official CDC recommendation says masks are not necessary and, due to shortages, should be saved only for the ill and for those in the healthcare industry. Yet, when my next door neighbor was hospitalized with severe respiratory distress at a hospital in Florida late last week, the doctors told only his husband to wear a mask, not him. Several people on social media asked about the recommendation The explanation hinges on the way COVID-19 is spread from person to person.
Unlike most of the hyper-contagious viruses featuring in popular dystopian fiction, COVID-19 cannot readily aerosolize. Viruses which aerosolize, like the measles or the fictional Motaba virus in the 1995 cult film Outbreak, are light enough to remain suspended in the air after being shed by an infected person. Famously, measles is so contagious that you can catch it from simply walking through a room where a patient had exhaled hours earlier.
All coronaviruses, on the other hand, have a lipid encapsulation which makes them too heavy to float suspended with the dust in the dust in the air. Instead, they are carried only by respiratory droplets: tiny specks of saliva or mucus from the nose, throat, and lungs of the infected.
This narrowly-limited vector allows us to constrain how the novel coronavirus spreads from person to person. Direct transmission occurs when an infected person sneezes or coughs directly onto a susceptible individual. Indirect transmission, which is far more common, occurs when a sneeze or cough sprays virally-active respiratory droplets onto a surface which is then touched by a susceptible person. With indirect transmission, the virus is subsequently transferred from the victim’s hands to the eyes, mouth, or nose.
CDC recommendations for masks, then, depend on which type of transmission is most likely. The familiar rectangular blue surgical masks should be worn in public spaces by anyone who suspects they might be ill, in order to prevent respiratory droplets from coughs or sneezes from reaching common surfaces and causing indirect transmission. This is the same reason surgical masks are worn during surgery: to prevent the surgeon from contaminating the sterile environment. Healthy people should not wear masks in public because they do nothing to guard against indirect transmission. In fact, they may tend to increase indirect transmission since a person wearing a mask is more likely to touch his or her face to adjust it.

On the other hand, medical caregivers and anyone in direct contact with the potentially infected should take measures to avoid direct transmission. However, a simple surgical mask leaves too much open space around the edges to be effective; instead, protective respirators capable of filtering particles are recommended, if possible. The use of a protective respirator should be accompanied by gloves which are discarded and replaced between patients.
Finally, for infected patients in isolation, the opposite becomes true. In an enclosed, designated space, wearing a mask does little to prevent the eventual contamination of the confined area, so there is no need for one.
Social media is filled with a swirl of useless recommendations. Taking a hot shower may feel like it raises your body temperature, but has no effect on the virus and cannot kill it (lipid-encapsulated viruses break down at 140 degrees Fahrenheit or 60 degrees Celsius). Eating a particular diet may be a good idea generally, and may in some cases shorten recovery from a minor illness, but it will not keep you from becoming infected or from being an asymptomatic carrier. Garlic and onions may keep other people away from you, but they won’t otherwise prevent infection. The same is true for “immune system boosters” like Vitamin C.
You cannot make homemade hand sanitizer out of vodka. Alcohol is effective at denaturing lipid encapsulations like COVID-19’s, but it must be over 60% alcohol to work. Vodka is just 40-proof, so rubbing it on your skin is a waste of good booze.

Countries which have seen success in stopping COVID-19 have done so not because of pseudoscientific remedies, but because these countries used aggressive containment and immediate testing that the United States has lacked before this week.
Protecting yourself from the Coronavirus Cybercriminal: They’re coming for your inbox
Cybercriminals want to exploit our fears about the coronavirus, and they’re coming after your email.
These are uncertain times. Every single day, our social media overflows with information (and misinformation) regarding the coronavirus pandemic. It’s hard to know who to believe. It’s a real cybercriminal’s dream.
Security professionals that have talked to the BBC say that the surge in email scams has been as bad as it has ever been. These email scams are worldwide, and even written in several different languages.
They’re relying on our fears to take action — an action that will expose login, email, and password information from your computer; an action that will infect your computer with malware or ransomware; actions that will drain your wallet — and fatten their coffers with ill-gotten gains.
Everyone MUST be diligent and do everything to protect themselves from these cyber-criminals. Most of these email scams are from what is known in the cybersecurity world as ‘phishing scams.’ These fake emails are designed to get you to respond to them by opening an attachment, clicking a button, or sending them money (which will go to cybercriminals, not the intended organization).
The Top 5 scams — so far.
Here are the top five scams reported out so far. These are the most common scams to date. But be aware, cybercriminals are an ingenious lot, they could become even more creative.
Click here for a cure. These cyber-criminals are sending out an email that claims some doctor has found a cure. If you attempt to open the attachment, you’re taken to a fake website where your login details are collected.
Coronavirus or COVID-19 tax refund. This is an email claiming that the government is giving a special COVID-19 tax refund. Just go to the official-looking website, enter all your information, and in a couple of short weeks, you will get a special refund. You’ll never see this bogus tax refund, and you may find your bank account has ‘mysteriously’ been depleted.
Fake WHO email (“Little measure that saves”). This is a fake email, from cyber-criminals who are pretending to be from the World Health Organization. It comes with an attachment that claims to tell you how to protect yourself. But when you click on the attachment, you are allowing the email to infect your computer with malware.
Airborne Virus Alert. This is an email scam that claims to ‘know’ a little secret: that it is known that COVID-19 is now capable of airborne transmission. The email is set up to look like it comes from the CDC. When you click on the link in this email, it takes you to a fake Microsoft login page, asking for your email username and password. Then the user is redirected to an actual CDC advice page — and the cyber-criminals now control your email.
Contribute to help in the COVID-19 fight. This email scam is asking users to donate to help develop a vaccine. The most ridiculous and obvious fault with this scam is that they ask the users to make donations in Bitcoin or some other cryptocurrency
In the days and weeks ahead, there is sure to be even more email scams around the coronavirus. They will continue to appear because the cyber-criminals know they can tap into our irrational fears about this pandemic. If people make irrational runs on toilet paper, surely the cybercriminals can get people to buy into their scams.
How to protect yourself
It’s quite easy to defend against these email scams. Understanding how these attacks all work is the key to preventing yourself from becoming an unknown victim.
Understand that government organizations do not send out emails that ask you for your private information. If these websites want you to log in, they all have a way for you to create accounts on their sites and have ways for you to change your password securely, should you ever forget.
Tax agencies, specifically the IRS, will NEVER ask for any of your personal information in an email. I’m not sure about other tax agencies, but the US, Internal Revenue Service, requires the taxpayer to talk to a live agent about any tax matters. Additionally, or obvious security reasons, the IRS still does most of its correspondence by mail.
NEVER, EVER click on a link or an attachment unless you are sure you know who sent it. As you can never be sure who is sending an unsolicited email, I would strongly advise you not to click into the link unless you do some checking on the site first. There are many places on the internet where you can put in the URL address and see if it’s legitimate
NEVER send money in response to an unsolicited email. The chances are that your money will go into the pockets of some cybercriminals, and will never reach its intended audience.
Finally, fact check everything. Most of these COVID-19 emails are preying on our irrational fears. My suggestion? Send those COVID-19 emails to your trash, where they deserve to go.
The COVID-19 pandemic is real. For most people, the effects are not too severe, but everyone is different. It has shown that it has the potential to be fatal — and that scares us. But with all the misinformation on social media, our fears have become quite irrational. Cybercriminals are betting that they can turn our irrational fears to their advantage.
The best defense against these COVID-19 social engineering attacks is knowledge and some common sense email defense. Just don’t click on any link or attachment that comes into your inbox unsolicited. Just. Don’t. Do. It.
If we would all follow this simple advice, we just might put the COVID-19 cybercriminals out of business.
It’s Tuesday. We’re in the middle of the worst public health crisis America has seen in a century. The bars and restaurants are closed. The polls are open.
For weeks now, experts have said that the key to managing the outbreak and preventing a death toll in the hundreds of thousands is “social distancing.” We’ve been warned to avoid public places and mass transit. The public has been advised to stay indoors as much as possible and work from home if they can.
Liberals have, for the most part, been adamant about adhering to these strictures, which makes it all the more baffling—and hypocritical—that so many have insisted on going ahead with today’s Democratic primary.
Thus far, five states have postponed their primaries due to the coronavirus outbreak, including Ohio, which was supposed to vote today, but the Governor defied a judge’s ruling and ordered polls to stay shuttered.
The Centers for Disease Control (CDC) has warned against gatherings of 50 or more, and in the chaos of the pandemic, it’s impossible to follow these guidelines during the election. For example, long lines at many polling places make it impractical to maintain the recommended distance of 6 feet between strangers.
There were mass poll closures prior to the primary and a fresh round today, with nearly 800 poll workers in Florida declining to show up. As a result, polling places have become huge vectors for disease with conditions that are likely to help the virus spread.

The CDC has also advised against gatherings of 10 or more people if they serve high-risk populations. Poll workers—who are overwhelmingly elderly volunteers—are themselves largely a high-risk population. It could have a devastating effect from community spread among people in their peer group, leading to an exponential growth in the death toll.
What’s more, polling places are short on the sanitation supplies needed to meet the CDC’s election guidelines.
Early this morning, a younger poll worker in Illinois named Rebecca posted a Twitter thread about the disruptions at her polling place. They started the day without cleaning supplies or a “blue box,” which is needed to vote.
After turning away more than three dozen voters, the polling station finally got its blue box and cleaning supplies: A 75-count pack of disinfectant wipes and an 8-ounce bottle of hand sanitizer to last 11 hours.

We’re at a critical stage of the outbreak right now in terms of what health experts refer to as “flattening the curve.” With the recent spike in cases, we’re currently on a trajectory similar to that of Italy, which suffered catastrophic loss of life.
Countries that have thus far successfully managed the crisis, such as South Korea and China, implemented massive publicly funded testing schemes and mandatory social distancing. The United States has had a shortage of testing supplies, and many are blithely ignoring requests to stay indoors. Moving forward with the primaries is the exact opposite of what good sense and scientific evidence would dictate.
Florida, which votes today, had a total of 26 confirmed coronavirus cases just a week ago. Today, there are 216, with more than a thousand tests still outstanding.
The primary will accelerate the spread of the virus, which means we may soon reach a critical point at which hospitals have to ration care.
A lot of people will argue—quite cynically—that we shouldn’t “politicize” this issue, but it is inherently political, as it involves both public health and democratic elections. It doesn’t matter whether one states the truth because it damages a political opponent or if they do it in the public interest.
And the truth is that Joe Biden’s campaign is so intent on wrapping up the primary as quickly as possible that they are willing to put their disproportionately elderly base in harm’s way.
In his coronavirus address, Biden repeatedly appealed to “science” and emphasized the importance of listening to experts. But in the run-up to today’s election, his campaign has put out misinformation about the risks of voting.

On Sunday night, his official Twitter account told followers that they should go to the polls if they’re “feeling healthy” and “not at risk of being exposed” to the virus.
But one of the most problematic features of the virus is that many carriers are asymptomatic and it takes an average of 5 days to incubate.
That’s a key premise of social distancing: People are supposed to act at all times as if they have the virus. And as we’ve already covered, the aforementioned guidelines, while sound in theory, haven’t worked out particularly well in practice.
On top of that, Biden adviser Symone Sanders told CNN that the CDC had asserted it was “safe out there on Tuesday.” When Bernie’s press secretary Briahna Joy Gray pointed out that this was false, she was accused by multiple Biden supporters as well as Center for American Progress President Neera Tanden of engaging in voter suppression.
Bernie has called for the postponement of the primaries until later in the spring. His campaign has suspended get out the vote efforts in primary states. Instead of urging voters to go out to the polls, spokesman Mike Casca emphasized that it’s a “personal decision,” and the campaign will “respect whichever choice they make.”
In addition to having tragic consequences in terms of public health and safety, the decision to move forward with the primary could carry a grave political cost.
For one, the depressed turnout today hurts faith in the integrity of the process, undermining confidence in the eventual nominee. If people were unable to vote due to fears over the outbreak, they might feel that their voices were neglected or that the vote was illegitimate. This could potentially lead to an increase in abstentionism in November.
And if a drastic spike in cases occurs after the primary in states that voted today, it would be a bad look for Biden, especially if there are large numbers of deaths. Right now, polls in the states that voted show that roughly two-thirds of respondents said they trusted Joe more in a crisis. At the same time, Sanders is consistently rated as more honest. The behavior of Biden’s campaign in pushing people out to vote could cost him significantly in terms of his credibility on the issue.
Furthermore, just given where we are in the curve, a spike is likely to occur in the next week regardless. Even if a causal link between the primaries and the uptick is entirely coincidental, Trump and the Republicans will seize on it.
The Democratic strategy hinges on Biden being less bad than Trump. Because Trump has mismanaged the coronavirus so badly, it’s assumed that the general election will be a blowout, but he’s not as exposed on the issue as one might think (at least not yet). The most recent poll found that a slim majority of Americans approve of the way Trump has handled the crisis so far.
If the outbreak gets worse after the primary, he has a convenient scapegoat. He’ll say that his health officials warned about asymptomatic spread while the Biden campaign opportunistically told his elderly supporters to go to the polls. If just a single person in Florida, Illinois or Arizona dies after voting, their face will be on every television screen during commercial breaks between now and November.
Also, the Trump administration might hit the Democrats from the left yet again. Today, they floated the idea of a temporary basic income to get families through the crisis.
The Democratic Party announced today that they will be working with states to implement mail-in ballots for the remainder of the primary. But it may be too late. The damage is most likely already done.
It’s another example of the atrophy that has set into American politics and evidence of why a forward-looking, progressive approach is needed now more than ever
Most of us haven’t experienced anything similar to the current situation. Schools, universities, shops, bars, restaurants and other recreational facilities are closed for the next couple of weeks in many countries around the world. Our movements are more and more restricted with flights and trains being canceled, borders being closed, curfews being discussed and entire lockdowns introduced. All of this is done for good reason, of course: to slow the spread of the novel coronavirus.
It seems our lives are coming to a halt and changing dramatically. And these restrictions are taking a toll on our economy and significantly influencing politics. In this post I will take a look at some graphs to describe what has already happened to the economy and politics (particularly in the US) and what this may mean for the future. Remember, there is a presidential election coming up in November of this year in the United States.
Note: This blog post should be considered as an opinion and not as a forecast.
How serious a threat is COVID-19?
It is without a doubt a serious threat to the entire world population. This Medium post nicely laid out why we must act today or many people will die and health care systems across the globe will collapse. The growth of new cases is exponential and has been exploding in some countries such as Italy, Iran, South Korea and China. However, the United States, Germany, France, Spain and other countries are only a few days behind the developments of more strongly affected countries.
Until March 16th, there were more confirmed cases in China than in all other countries combined. However, China’s complete shutdown of public life has helped flattening the growth rate. And many other countries across all continents are adapting now similar restrictions on its citizens.
Italy is the country with the second highest number of cases and the growth is still exponential, followed by Iran, Spain, South Korea, and Germany. This graph also shows the difficulties that the Italian health care system has had in dealing with the COVID-19 outbreak. And it is a precursor for other countries that are on the same trajectory as Italy, only a few days behind.
What is being talked about in the news?
It has been virtually impossible to miss that there is currently a pandemic going on. And all the updates about COVID-19 have been drowning out anything else that is not related to the pandemic. One of those things being the Democratic primary elections and the campaigns for the general election in November.
The above graph shows the development of news stories on the topic of COVID-19 and election related news (in the US) published in digital outlets and newspapers in the US. At the end of February, the number of COVID-19 news stories first passed the number of election news stories and this was even before Super Tuesday! Beyond that point, the number of coronavirus news stories exploded.
What is also interesting is how things being discussed in those news stories changed over time. While in mid-February, the main concerns in the election news stories were the New Hampshire primary, Bernie Sanders, the Democrats and Trump, this shifted in mid March to Trump, Joe Biden and coronavirus. Mid Februar to mid March also saw in a shift in topics within COVID-19 related news stories. While most stories revolved around stranded cruise ships, the situation in China and the “new virus” in February, this changed to Trump’s actions being the center of attention in mid March.
TV news shifted in the same way from covering election related topics (caucuses, primaries, Democratic presidential contenders etc.) with almost 50% of airtime to an increase in coverage of the coronavirus. As of last week, the three major cable news channels (CNN, MSNBC, FOX NEWS) spent close to 20% of their airtime on the virus outbreak.
Interestingly, FOX News is spending the most time out of all news channels on discussing the outbreak. And unlike the other outlets, FOX News has been far less critical of Trump’s approach to COVID-19. The coverage there may significantly contribute to how Americans of different parties view the threat of the coronavirus (more on this below).There is a great article on the development of the Dow Jones Index in MarketWatch which shows how long the recovery of the index took after the economy went into recession. It took 25 years to make up for the losses of the Great Depression, 16 years to recover from the economically and politically tumultuous years in the ‘70s and ‘80s and 6 years to regain what was lost during the 2008 financial crisis. Currently, we are still at the beginning of a bear market, so we don’t know when the stock market will turn around and how long it’ll take to regain losses. But regulators assume the downward trend will continue for weeks.
The Fed cut its rate to close to 0 % on Sunday evening in an attempt to calm investors. However, investors didn’t take this as a sign of confidence. Trading halted at the New York Stock Exchange the next day right after the opening because the S&P 500 fell more than 7%.
The difference to the financial crisis of 2008 is that we are dealing with a health crisis. Any steps taken by supranational, national and local governments are aimed at avoiding a devastating crash of health care systems around the world. However, in the short- and medium-term, the restrictions immediately affect the bottom line of companies, resulting in lost jobs.
Countries worldwide are trying to soften the blow with emergency stimulus packages for the economy or even immediate cash payments to its citizens (as announced by the Trump administration). All signs point to a recession. But the question is how long it’ll stay. Some hope there’ll be a fast bounce-back, but there is no certainty. A look at China shows that recovery may take longer than anticipated.
Wasn’t there something about an election this year?
There are indeed local, state, congressional and presidential elections happening this November in the United States. The democratic presidential primary election was heavily covered in the news, however, attention has been changing towards COVID-19 since end of February. Campaign rallies have been canceled, debates were broadcast without an audience and even primaries in some states have been rescheduled for later dates to avoid further spread of the virus.
Historically, presidential re-election campaigns during a recession year are tough and chances for re-election of the incumbent decrease when the economy shrinks. This would mean that Trump’s chances to reign another 4 years are decreasing if the economy will go into a drawn out recession spanning multiple months. Jimmy Carter lost his re-election bid in a year that saw a months-long recession, Obama won amid the financial crisis of 2008 and Clinton’s win over George H. W. Bush in 1992 was partially attributed to a recession that ended one and a half years earlier.
And while the economy is a good predictor of elections, and this article here argues that a recession in the first two quarters of 2020 may lead to Trump losing (accounting for his Electoral College advantage), it may be more complicated in the Trump era to predict the outcome.His overall approval ratings have never been great, with numbers in the high 30s to mid 40s. However, they have been stable. Whether he was impeached, publicly decried for his support of white supremacists, or criticized by his own party for the air strike on Soleimani, there was not a lot of change.
Moreover, these ratings mask the highly partisan divide over his performance. He has a very loyal base, just like there are very loyal Never-Trumpers. This divide can also be observed in the current coronavirus crisis. According to polls conducted during the first week of March and aggregated by FiveThirtyEight, Republicans highly approve of Trump’s measures to combat the outbreak, while Democrats strongly disapprove.Also, we saw earlier in the graph depicting coronavirus coverage on TV that FOX News was spending a lot of time covering this topic. But the political commentators on this network have played down fears, showing that the echo chamber isn’t restricted to Facebook. In times of social media, fake news and highly partisan divides, the economy may still be a decisive factor in elections. However, betting all cards on the economy may not necessarily lead to a Democratic presidential contender winning.
What the above surveys don’t show is how the electoral college will factor into the final election outcome. Moreover, Trump has started to listen to his advisers, like Dr. Anthony Fauci, about how to handle this health crisis. After denying the threat of the virus didn’t work, he is now proposing to flush billions of dollars of cash into the economy to avoid an economic downturn. All of this could factor into how voters ultimately judge Trump’s performance at the ballot in November.The ideas drawn from the above graphs and data are of course only one interpretation of the current situation which is very unstable with new, daily-life altering information being released every day. The economy and politics are adapting to the new circumstances created by the coronavirus and it remains to be seen whether the economy will enter a recession, how long and severe it may be and whether this will lead to a change in the White House.
In February, I found myself in line at the Brussels airport to go through passport control on my way back home to Geneva. I was returning from Dakar, where I had been fortunate to participate in one of the African continent’s first training sessions on laboratory testing for the 2019 novel coronavirus. Still dreary from the evening flight, I looked around the line and noticed a good number of people around me wearing surgical masks. At that time, the vast majority of COVID-19 cases were in China, with a few cases found in other parts of East and Southeast Asia. That was no problem for me, as I had been nowhere near China. However, I began to notice others meeting my glance and slowly inching away from me. Then I realized: I was being avoided because I’m Asian.
The irony of traveling from a meeting about laboratory testing for the novel coronavirus was not lost on me, but I felt targeted. It was as if I did something bad and that, somehow, I shouldn’t be there.
COVID-19, first identified in Wuhan, China in late 2019, has infected over 100,000 individuals infected in over 100 countries at the time of publication. As confirmed cases continued to grow, so have reports of xenophobia and stigmatization, especially against Chinese and Asian communities throughout the world.
Unfortunately, this is a common experience, as people disproportionately affected by disease often face stigmatization by the larger society. Stigmatization negatively affects our ability to stop disease transmission by making those in the targeted community less likely to seek care for fear of being ostracized. What is especially challenging in the global response to COVID-19 is the rapid spread of misinformation (which the World Health Organization (WHO) aptly calls an “infodemic”) coupled with the global political shift to protectionism and populism. This only further fuels bias against certain groups and prevents access to the necessary information to slow and eventually stop the virus’ spread.
Stigma and misinformation is a pervasive challenge in the response to COVID-19 as we’ve seen blaming of entire communities and personal attacks. How do we, as global health and public health practitioners, counter stigma and ensure that accurate information is circulating?
Acknowledging that there is exhaustive stigma related to the COVID-19 pandemic is an important first step. The WHO and U.S. Centers for Disease Control released great guidelines for how to respond to stigma around the current outbreak. Health and risk communication is vital to outbreak response and we have a responsibility to share facts and speak up against misinformation and bias. Lastly, we need to show compassion and support for individuals and communities who are disproportionately affected by this disease.
It’s important to remember that infectious diseases are indiscriminate. And the only way to effectively respond to COVID-19 is to tackle the challenge, without discrimination, together.
Devy Emperador was a 2012–2013 Global Health Corps fellow in Uganda. She is currently a Scientific Officer at FIND, where she manages diagnostic development and lab capacity building projects for epidemic- and pandemic-prone diseases in low- and middle-income regions.
Global Health Corps (GHC) is a leadership development organization building the next generation of health equity leaders around the world. All GHC fellows, partners, and supporters are united in a common belief: health is a human right. There is a role for everyone in the movement for health equity. To learn more, visit our website and connect with us on Twitter/Instagram/Facebook.
Looking out the window of a double-sealed, negative-air-flow, bio-containment room in one of the best hospitals in the state of Florida, I am one of several patients here being treated for likely exposure to Novel Coronavirus. I am receiving round-the-clock care from a stellar medical team dedicated to bio-containment patients like me.
I can’t say that I have Coronavirus right now, because at the time of publishing this it has been 98 hours since entering the ER and my test results are still not back. My experience is as a recipient and observer of healthcare, with no professional or educational background in public health. I’m a frequently hand-sanitizing mid-30s male who will survive and thrive after this virus has run its course. But I am worried for our country.
First, I feel it’s important to say that if you are in good general health and can avoid taking up a hospital bed, follow the guidance to stay home and isolate. Call your doctor or local health professional for advice on your specific situation. Coronavirus is deadly, much more so to vulnerable populations, which is why I should not be stuck in this room.
I Felt Good, Until I Didn’t
I didn’t want to be in a Florida hospital, or any hospital for that matter. I ended up here after experiencing symptoms mid-flight, including shortness of breath and body aches. By the time my flight landed, my breathing was severely weakened, my upper body was aching all over, I had a fever, and nausea. Being a visitor, I had nowhere to safely quarantine without possibly exposing others, so I didn’t go to the hotel where my husband had checked in a day earlier (I was accompanying him on a work trip). While taxiing on the runway, I researched the best hospital within a few miles, called ahead and went straight to the emergency room from the airport — sanitation wipes in hand. I got lucky to land in a city with lots of healthcare options. Many Americans won’t be this lucky.
I was admitted to a fairly empty ER. After reporting that I had just come from the airport, had visited four other US cities in the past two weeks, and that my husband and I had both been in close contact with friends in their 70s and 80s over the past week, I was evaluated and given IV drugs for pain, anti-nausea (I was vomiting at this point), Tylenol for fever, and fluids for hydration. I understand that Coronavirus is different for everyone. What I had was much worse than any flu I’ve experienced. I was grateful for thorough treatment, particularly for the pain meds that made it more comfortable to breath.
My thoughts were pinballing between fear and confusion. I had been washing hands, avoiding large events, using hand sanitizer, and I even took my own temperature before heading to the airport to make sure I wasn’t developing anything before a three-day trip (I registered 98 degrees). I was being proactive and doing everything I was told. I felt good…until I didn’t.
The mid-air sickness had come on hard and quick. And with it, the guilt. Did I put a half-filled airplane at risk? Did I expose any friends this week? Is my husband going to get sick? As I pondered what led to our collective confusion and fear around Coronavirus, I grew frustrated with the realization that my caregivers at a top notch hospital weren’t getting any more clear guidance from health officials than I was. The questions and protocols on which the doctors sought guidance were being considered for the first time. There was no plan, and that was the problem.
A health crisis like this was predicted and ignored two years ago by the very people who are charged with our public safety.
In May of 2018, while an Ebola outbreak was appearing in Northwest Congo, the White House disbanded the team that was responsible for coordinating and responding to health pandemics. That same week, a member of that now-disbanded team spoke at an Emory University health symposium saying, “the threat of pandemic flu is the #1 health security concern.”
The First Test
Back in the ER, my nose was swabbed to test for 20 or so infections that weren’t Coronavirus, because CDC testing requirements dictate those be ruled out first, despite the well-reported transmission speed of this pandemic. I was given a chest x-ray and CT scan to look for fluid in the lungs. The blood and swab tests for other infections, including some more common Coronaviruses, took several hours and came back negative. Meanwhile my symptoms were persisting, and my fever was getting worse. My husband was with me by this point, and feeling physically well, but frustrated that there seemed to be no movement on testing for what the medical professionals agreed my symptoms were reflecting. Sitting behind a closed-door ER for hours, and already a bit nervous, I began to imagine, with worry, what kind of testing would or wouldn’t happen when fifty more people like me show up with severe symptoms after having been on an airplane, at the grocery store, etc.
At the precise time I was being tested for non-Coronavirus infections, South Korea had launched a revolutionary telehealth program to provide remote care to patients exhibiting symptoms via video call. I say revolutionary because South Korea has a long history of opposing telemedicine, yet their state-run university has been granted a reprieve of those restrictions due to the severity of the health crisis. Just last week, our congress passed a similar reprieve allowing Medicare to waive telehealth restrictions. This tool may become invaluable to us all.
A day prior to my ER admittance, I had friends making their way back from Northern Italy to Washington, DC after a multi-week trip. When they arrived at Dulles International Airport, they went through customs with no screening or questions about their health or itinerary. Thankfully, those friends seem to be symptom-free, but they were never tested. Another friend was in Italy recently, returned to the US exhibiting Coronavirus symptoms, and was denied a Coronavirus test after the preliminary tests caught a flu. He was told he could not be further tested, according to guidelines, despite the possibility he could have both viruses. This perplexing failure of our national health system is truly troubling when you think about the thousands of people across the Corona-exposed globe who rushed back to the United States due to news of impending travel bans. In the same week that Italy went on lockdown, I personally have five friends returning from that country without being tested.
The Real Test
I was beginning to think I wouldn’t be tested either. Finally, after about ten hours, I was swabbed for the second time to test for the virus.
Testing protocols, even at one of the top hospitals in a state with an overwhelmingly large at-risk elderly population remain slow, bottlenecked, and without clear guidance. I was told the results would be returned within 24–48 hours, and I was eager to know if I should call the airline I had just flown. I was advised not to unless test results were positive.
“But why the delay in results?” I asked. The hospital couldn’t test my swab on site. Only state agencies were permitted to test at that point, which means all samples had to be sent out. Even if hospitals and private labs had staff and lab equipment ready to be put to work, the CDC wasn’t allowing that despite being months into a fast-spreading worldwide pandemic.
I sat in the hospital watching the Governor of Florida on TV boast about having purchased more testing capacity than most states — for a total 625,000 patients, or .03% of the state population. It was surreal hearing him boast about that from where I was sitting. As has been well-documented, more tests would have been available in our country weeks ago if the CDC hadn’t refused the World Health Organization-approved test that was developed in Germany in favor of its own test which turned out to be flawed — eventually setting us weeks back in fighting what was already a pandemic. As I mentioned before, I’m not a health expert, but It doesn’t take a PhD to know that you need to test and study something in order to effectively fight it. And scientists agree that the United States has bungled this response — with fatal results.
Movin’ on Up
After 13 hours in the ER, my situation had earned an “upgrade” to a bio-contained room outfitted with two doors and security monitoring. All medical staff must wear full protective covering with face masks that cover the mouth, nose and eyes. Meanwhile, my husband had initially been given conflicting directions on whether or not he should even wear a face mask while with me in the hospital, and had not been asked to don other protective gear. He is not being considered for testing (he has shown no symptoms), and he is permitted to leave and come back, provided he washes his hands and wears gloves in the elevators, a protocol that would be abruptly changed toward the end of our stay to require him NOT to wear gloves in the hallways and elevators.
We’ve inquired about the disparity between concern for my transmission ability and his, and it boils down to lack of information. When I arrived at this hospital, I was only the second case that day of possible Coronavirus that warranted overnight stay. The highly experienced nurses and doctors have been receiving “evolving” (i.e. conflicting) protocols and guidance from the CDC and state health agencies ever since. This conflicting guidance is not just for me as the patient, but also for people like my husband, who may be at risk and of risk to the community. This lack of prepared information from our CDC bogglingly persists a full month and a half after the World Health Organization had already deemed Coronavirus a “public health emergency of international concern.”
A New Day
I woke up Saturday morning to headlines that France had shuttered its famed cafes and restaurants, and Italy was reporting nearly 1500 deaths, about half of what China was reporting. Word was spreading around the US of infection rates doubling in some cities, and large gatherings all across the globe were being cancelled left and right.
My own personal headline was to finally let my family and friends know that I was at risk, and therefore they might be too. At this point, we were hearing that test results might actually take 3–4 days instead of the 1–2 reported by the state. I weighed the options of being alarmist with my friends and family by cautioning them to self-monitor and isolate without actual proof of exposure; or waiting it out for final test results from the state. I also felt, and still feel, the guilt of occupying a hospital bed that surely someone else needs, because my more severe symptoms were subsiding. I began inquiring about discharge and got conflicting answers about possible housing options to self-quarantine locally, or rental cars to drive home instead of fly, or simply staying put in the hospital.
After sharing my situation on social media, I heard from friends who were either in self-quarantine or in situations like mine — stuck in a place they didn’t want to be, waiting for results. Waiting and waiting and waiting. My husband and I passed the time by watching a new show about Nazi hunters on Amazon (it’s good, check it out), calling friends and family, and trying to be as kind and understanding as possible with the medical staff who are still trying to make sense of a national crisis that lacks leadership and protocol.
Three-Day Weekend
By my third day in quarantine, Coronavirus-related news around the world was accelerating even more. Italy, Spain and France reported their highest single-day death tolls. News dropped that the US may be trying to extract exclusivity rights from Germany for a Coronavirus vaccine, escalating the “we can do it better than you can” scenario which played out tragically over testing kits. And the Senate was on its last day of a three-day weekend instead of staying at work to finalize and vote on an emergency relief package for a pandemic that is literally killing people.
Our three-day weekend was supposed to come to an end as well, but we missed our flight home. Without test results, the medical staff didn’t want to release me. I don’t blame them, though they showed frustration in not getting guidance on discharging patients who are mid-travel (which is half of Florida on any given weekend). I’m grateful that American Airlines gave us flight credits with no charge, and frustrated that Amtrak tried to charge my husband a 25% cancellation fee for other upcoming trips, even while making a call to customer service from inside the hospital bio containment room. That may seem like small potatoes, but the compounding effect of charging people who are likely to lose out on income ability due to this virus is criminal. All over the country we have seen arts and theatre performances going dark, restaurants shuttering, bars being forced to close, leaving consumers, contractors, and far too many unprotected employees asking dire questions.
I was still asking the question, “are my results in?” 48 hours. 56 hours. 72 hours. The health system of the most powerful nation on earth was failing, slowly, before my eyes.
Bustin’ Out
It’s my fourth day in the hospital, and as I’m writing this, I’ve finally been directed by doctors in consultation with the local health department to go home and self quarantine, even without test results. Primarily, they’re comfortable because I have been symptom-free for 24 hours and am not coughing or sneezing. Transmission risk is low. So I’ll be in a rental car for the next 15 or so hours interacting with no one outside of the car. My husband will drop me off at home in DC, and I’ll self quarantine in our guest room until we have more information from the test results. Everyone seems to feel this is the safe and reasonable choice. I don’t need a hospital bed, and others in South Florida surely will.
I’m thinking of those people on my airplane four days ago, who are now just a day shy of the median incubation time for Coronavirus that I may or may not have infected. I was advised not to call the airline until I know the test results, and that seemed reasonable at the time. But now? Is the guy who sat next to me and refused my offer of sanitation wipes regretting that decision? Is the flight attendant who saw me move to an empty row mid-flight unknowingly carrying this virus across the country? Is the pilot reading this story?
Like many of us, I’m still not sure what happens now. What I know is this — I am worried. Every doctor I’ve seen has said some version of, “this will get much worse before it gets better.” I don’t say this to be alarmist, but to hopefully help change behavior more quickly than I changed my own.
This canary in the bio-contained coal mine is screaming out for those who are most vulnerable.
I didn’t stop to consider the cost of a hospital stay until I was already here, but that is not the reality for many Americans. I didn’t worry about doctors believing my symptoms, but that is not the reality for many Americans. I didn’t worry about unpaid sick leave, but that is not the reality for many Americans.
The first doctor I saw in the ER was basically yelling at the sky saying that this facility isn’t even ready for two cases, let alone the 100s that will be coming. The hospitals do not yet have enough supplies, staff, or appropriately secured rooms to deal with a fast-spreading disease. They may get there, if they are given enough time, money, and resources. The more we do our part to social distance, the more time we will buy for our hospitals to build up and protect the most vulnerable. And if we can do that together, it would be a remarkable statement of action about who we are and what we value.
If there is a light in my story, it is the healthcare workers I have encountered. In this time, our medical staff, nurses, and doctors are the heroes. Despite what seems to be a criminal dereliction of duty by elected officials, the healthcare workers are doing everything in their power to keep us safe. Next time you see a healthcare worker, please show them appreciation. But in the meantime, please protect one another by hunkering down and staying home.